# Predicting and Managing the impact of Earthquake
# Please read the approach.txt file for reference on how to access the files

**Problem Statement/Objective**: Natural disasters like earthquakes have always caused incalculable damage to structures and properties and caused the deaths of millions of people throughout the world. In order to minimize the impact of such a deadly event in these regions national, international and transnational organizations take all sorts of pre- and post-disaster measures. Because time and quantity of the organization’s relief resources are limiting factors, emergency managers have to find an optimal schedule for assigning resources to the affected areas. Leveraging the power of machine learning is one viable option to determine the degree of damage that is done to buildings post an earthquake. It can help identify safe and unsafe buildings which helps to predict most damaged prone area and thus avoiding death and injuries resulting from aftershock while simultaneously making rescue efforts easy and efficient.

**Proposed Solution**:  An earthquake suddenly strikes an area causing damage that varies according to the intensity of the quake and local geological conditions. Our disaster management system works by predicting the extent of damage caused to the buildings, homes, etc in the aftermath of an earthquake. This is done by classifying these structures on a scale based on various factors like its age, foundation, number of floors, material used, etc. We then take into account the number of families and the probable casualities ward-by-ward in a district. This helps us to direct relief forces proportionately ward-wise and prioritize them based on extent of damage. This can help save as many lives as quickly as possible and turn out to be an efficient and cost-effective solution.

**Dataset Analysis**: We have used the dataset provided by Hackerearth for their challenge 'Predict the damage to a building'. This dataset comprises of 4 files namely- train.csv, test.csv, Building_Ownership_Use.csv and Building_Structure.csv. The Building_structure.csv file has data items like foundation type (type of foundation of the building), age_building (the age in years of the building) etc., for different buildings. We have analysed all these parameters with the damage grade using the data in train.csv with the help of external libraries such as matplotlib. We then identified the distinctive and striking affecting features and discard the unwanted ones.

**ML Model Design**: We have used RandomForestClassifier to classify each building into one of the grades and then by using feature importance score we further improved our model.

**Possible Extensions**: Our model can be further improved by the inclusion of distribution of resources like food, clothes, medical, monetary supplies based on the extent of human casualities and the damage incurred by the various structures. Further we could use technologies like **SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar)** image data and GPS satellite data and appropriate ML models to improve our earthquake disaster management system. This could be done by using CNN on pre-Earthquake and post-Earthquake images but since the data for the SAR imaging is not publicly available, we are trying to contact concerned departments for the same. 

